# Introduction

SmokeRand is a set of tests for pseudorandom number generators. Tested
generators should return either 32-bit or 64-bit unsigned uniformly distributed
unsigned integers. Its set of tests resembles SmallCrush, Crush and BigCrush
from TestU01 but has several important differences:

- Supports 64-bit generators directly, without taking upper/lower parts,
  interleaving etc.
- Direct access to the lowest bits of 32 or 64 bit generator that improves
  sensitivity of tests.
- Minimialistic sets of tests. However, the selected tests are powerful
  enough to detect flaws in a lot of popular PRNGs.
- High speed: `brief` battery runs in less than 1 minute, `default` in less
  than 5 minutes and `full` in less than 1 hour.
- Multithreading support by means of POSIX threads or WinAPI threads.

# Compilation

SmokeRand supports four software build systems: GNU Make, CMake, Ninja and
WMake (Open Watcom make). Usage of Ninja and WMake requires Lua 5.x interpreter
for generation of `build.ninja` or `Makefile.wat` scripts respectively
(see `cfg_ninja.lua` and `cfg_wmake.lua`). All pseudorandom number generators
are built as dynamic libraries: `.dll` (dynamic linked libraries) for Windows
and 32-bit DOS and `.so` (shared objects) for GNU/Linux and other UNIX-like systems.

## GNU Make

The manually written script for GNU Make is `Makefile.gnu` and doesn't require
CMake. GNU Make: supports gcc, clang (as zig cc) but not MSVC or Open Watcom.
Has `install` and `uninstall` pseudotargets for GNU/Linux.

If you work under Debian-based GNU/Linux distribution - you can run the
`make_pkg.sh` script that will compile SmokeRand and will create `.deb` package.
Otherwise just use GNU Make (`install` is optional):

    $ make -f Makefile.gnu
    $ make -f Makefile.gnu install

## CMake

    $ cmake CMakeLists.txt
    $ make

## Ninja

The `build.ninja` script is generated by `cfg_ninja.lua` Lua script. Usage

    $ lua cfg_ninja.lua cfg_name
    $ ninja

Supported configurations:

- `gcc`, `mingw`: gcc with POSIX threads.
- `gcc32`: gcc, cross-compilation for 32-bit platforms.
- `msvc`: Microsoft Visual C, automatic resolution of `.h`-file dependencies
  is supported only for English version of MSVC.
- `mingw-hx`: 32-bit binaries friendly to HX DOS Extender.
- `zigcc`: clang from Zig programming language distribution as `zig cc`
  command, WinAPI threads will be used.

## WMake (Open Watcom)

Designed for Open Watcom C/C++, compiles for 32-bit Windows NT, 32-bit DOS
(with extenders) and 16-bit DOS. The dynamic libraries with PRNGs (DLLs)
are shared between Windows and 32-bit DOS version. The `Makefile.wat` makefile
for `wmake` is generated by means of the `cfg_wmake.lua` script:

    > lua cfg_wmake.lua
    > wmake -f Makefile.wat

# How to test a pseudorandom number generator

The are two ways to test PRNGs using SmokeRand:

1. Through stdin/stdio pipes. Simple but doesn't support multithreading.
2. Load PRNG from a shared library. More complex but allows multithreading.
   A lot of PRNG plugins are supplied with SmokeRand.

To test the generator the next command can be used:

    $ ./smokerand default generators/lcg64.so --threads

## Integration with PractRand

SmokeRand can send the generator output to `stdout` in binary form and this
can be used for testing the PRNG with PractRand:

    $ ./smokerand stdout generators/lcg64.so | RNG_test stdin32 -multithreaded

Getting PRNG input from stdin (multithreading is not supported in this case):

    $ ./smokerand stdout generators/lcg64.so | ./smokerand express stdin32

## Integration with TestU01

TestU01 is a well known and very respected set of statistical tests for
pseudorandom number generators. It can be used as a custom battery for
SmokeRand by means of the [TestU01-threads](https://github.com/alvoskov/TestU01-threads)
wrapper. This wrapper supports parallel run of tests from SmallCrush, Crush and
BigCrush batteries by implementing its own multithreading dispatcher.

    $ ./smokerand s=libtestu01th_sr_ext.so generators/lcg64.so --batparam=SmallCrush --threads

SmokeRand resolves an old problem of 64-bit PRNG testing by supplying different
filters than transform 64-bit PRNG into a 32-bit one:

- Interleaved 32-bit parts: `--filter=interleaved32`
- Higher 32 bits (default): `--filter=high32`
- Lower 32 bits: `--filter=low32`

# Batteries

Four batteries are implemented in SmokeRand:

- `express` - simplified battery that consists of 7 tests and can be
  rewritten for 16-bit platforms with 64KiB segments of data and code.
  Less powerful than `brief` but may be more sensitive than diehard
  or even dieharder.
- `brief` - a fast battery that includes a reduced set of tests, e.g.
  matrix rank tests and some tests for higher bits of generators
  are excluded.
- `default` - a more comprehensive but slower battery with extra tests
  for higher bits of generators and matrix rank tests. Other tests use
  larger samples that make them more sensitive.
- `full` - similar do default but uses larger samples. 


 Battery | Number of tests | Bytes (32-bit PRNG) | Bytes (64-bit PRNG)
---------|-----------------|---------------------|---------------------
 express | 7               | 2^26                | 2^27
 brief   | 25              | 2^35                | 2^36
 default | 42              | 2^37                | 2^38
 full    | 46              | 2^40                | 2^41


Batteries from TestU01 use the next number of values:

- SmallCrush --- 2^26 values (comparable to `express` battery)
- Crush --- 2^35 values (comparable to `default` battery)
- BigCrush -- 2^38 values (comparable to `full` battery)

However SmokeRand tests are about 5-10 times faster than tests from TestU01
due to optimized implementations that don't use floating point values and
multiplications whenever possible. Birthday spacings tests use radix sort
instead of QuickSort.

Custom batteries of tests also can be created as both scripts and dynamic
libraries.

# Existing solutions

Existing solutions:

1. [TestU01](https://doi.org/10.1145/3447773). Has a very comprehensive set of
   tests and an excellent documentation. Doesn't support 64-bit generator,
   has issues with analysis of lowest bits.
2. [PractRand](https://pracrand.sourceforge.net/). Very limited number of tests
   but they are good ones and detect flaws in a lot of PRNGs. Tests are mostly
   suggested by the PractRand author and is not described in scientific
   publications. Their advantage -- they accumulate information from a sequence
   of 1024-byte blocks and can be applied to arbitrary large samples.
3. [Ent](https://www.fourmilab.ch/random/). Only very basic tests, even 64-bit
   LCG will probably pass them.
4. [Dieharder](https://webhome.phy.duke.edu/~rgb/General/dieharder.php).
   Resembles DIEHARD, but contains more tests and uses much larger samples.
   Less sensitive than TestU01.
5. [gjrand](https://gjrand.sourceforge.net/). Has some unique and sensitive
   tests but documentation is scarce.
